William Penn was descended from an old English family which, as early as
the beginning of the fifteenth century, had settled in the county of
Buckinghamshire in the southern part of England, and of which a branch
seems later to have moved to the neighboring county of Wiltshire, for in
a church in the town of Mintye there is a tablet recording the death of
a William Penn in 1591. It was a grandson and namesake of this William
Penn, and the father of our hero, however, who first made the family
name distinguished. Brought up as a sailor by his father, the captain of
a merchantman, with whom he visited not only the principal ports of
Spain and Portugal, but also the distant shores of Asia Minor, he
afterward entered the service of the government and so distinguished
himself that in his twentieth year he was made a captain in the royal
navy. In 1643 he married Margaret Jasper, the clever and beautiful
daughter of a Rotterdam merchant, and from this time his sole ambition
was to make a name for himself and elevate his family to a rank they had
not hitherto enjoyed. In this he succeeded, partly by policy, but also
unquestionably by natural ability; for although the name of Penn is
scarcely enrolled among England’s greatest naval heroes, yet at the
early age of twenty-three he had been made a rear-admiral, and two years
later was advanced to the rank of vice-admiral—this too at a time when
advancement in the English navy could only be obtained by real merit and
valuable service.

Penn’s father was also shrewd enough to take advantage of circumstances
and turn them to his profit. Although at heart a royalist, he did not
scruple to go over to the revolutionists when it became evident that the
monarchy must succumb to the power of the justly incensed people and
Parliament; and when the head of Charles the First had fallen under the
executioner’s axe and Oliver Cromwell had seized the reins of
government, Admiral Penn was prompt to offer his homage. Cromwell on his
part may have had some justifiable doubts as to the sincerity of this
allegiance, but knowing Penn to be an ambitious man of the world, he
felt reasonably sure of winning him over completely to the side of the
Commonwealth by consulting his interests. He had need of such men just
then, for the alliance between England and Holland, which he was
endeavoring to bring about, had just been frustrated by the passage by
Parliament of the Navigation Act of 1651, requiring that foreign
merchandise should be brought to England on English vessels only. This
was a direct blow at the flourishing trade hitherto carried on by the
Dutch with English ports, and a war with Holland was inevitable. As this
must of necessity be a naval war, Cromwell was quite ready to accept the
services of so able and experienced an officer as William Penn. The
young admiral fully justified the Protector’s confidence, for it was
largely owing to his valor that the war, during which ten great naval
battles were fought, ended in complete victory for the English.

Scarcely less distinguished were his services in the subsequent war with
Spain, when he was given the task of destroying that country’s
sovereignty in the West Indies. He conquered the island of Jamaica,
which was added to England’s possessions, but was unable to retrieve an
unsuccessful attempt of the land forces assisting him to capture the
neighboring island of Hispaniola. He had been shrewd enough to make
terms with Cromwell before sailing for the West Indies. In compensation
for the damages inflicted on his Irish property during the civil war he
was granted an indemnity, besides the promise of a valuable estate in
Ireland, and the assurance of protection for his family during his
absence. It was well for Penn that he did so, for on his return he was
summarily deprived of his office and cast into prison—ostensibly for his
failure to conquer Hispaniola. The real reason, however, for this action
on the part of Cromwell was doubtless due to his knowledge of certain
double dealing on the part of Penn, who, shrewdly foreseeing that the
English Commonwealth was destined to be short-lived and that on the
death of Cromwell the son of the murdered King would doubtless be
restored to the throne, had secretly entered into communication with
this prince, then living at Cologne on the Rhine, and placed at his
disposition the entire fleet under his command. The offer had been
declined, it is true, Charles at that time being unable to avail himself
of it, but it had reached the ears of Cromwell, who took this means of
punishing the admiral’s disloyalty.